JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
On the "NewsHour" tonight:
DONALD TRUMP, President of the
United States:
I have heard it's one of the
toughest deals
of all.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In Israel,
President Trump
insists peace in the Middle East
requires
resolving the longstanding
conflict with the
Palestinians.
Then, we break down the upcoming
battle over
federal government spending.
What's on the Trump
administration's chopping
block?
And preserving the heart of a
very old city.
Jeffrey Brown takes us to
Tunisia, a country
with a newly democratic
government working
to embrace the richness of its
culture.
LEILA BEN GACEM, Tunisia: Civil
society is
very active today investing,
investing time,
money, energy, advocacy to
restore such beautiful
spaces and bring back the magic
to the Medina.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All that and more
on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: President Trump
is spending
tonight in Israel, after a day
of talking
up peace prospects in the
region.
It's all part of his first
overseas trip since
taking office.
We begin our coverage with a
report from John
Yang.
JOHN YANG: Amid the pomp of
President Trump's
arrival ceremony in Israel was
an issue of
policy that's confounded
presidents for generations,
the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict.
DONALD TRUMP, President of the
United States:
Now we must work together to
build a future
where the nations of the region
are at peace.
We have before us a rare
opportunity to bring
security and stability and peace
to this region.
BENJAMIN NETANYAHU, Israeli
Prime Minister:
Israel's hand is extended to
peace in peace
to all our neighbors, including
the Palestinians.
The peace we seek is a genuine
and durable
one, in which the Jewish state
is recognized,
security remains in Israel's
hands, and the
conflict ends once and for all.
JOHN YANG: The warmth between
the two men
was evident, as was the Israeli
prime minister's
pleasure in both the change of
U.S. presidents
and a new direction on Iran.
BENJAMIN NETANYAHU: I want you
to know how
much we appreciate the change in
American
policy on Iran.
I want you to know how much we
appreciate
your bold decision to act
against the use
of chemical weapons in Syria.
And I want to tell you also how
much we appreciate
the reassertion of American
leadership in
the Middle East.
JOHN YANG: In an unscripted
moment, the president
seemed to give the first
official confirmation
that the highly classified
intelligence he
gave Russian officials came from
the Israelis.
DONALD TRUMP: I never mentioned
the word or
the name Israel, never mentioned
it during
that conversation.
JOHN YANG: In Jerusalem's Old
City, Mr. Trump
visited two of the holiest sites
of Christianity
and Judaism: the Church of the
Holy Sepulchre,
believed by many Christians to
be the site
of Jesus' tomb, and the Western
Wall, believed
by Jews to be part of Herod's
Second Temple.
Mr. Trump began his trip with a
much-anticipated
visit to Saudi Arabia.
There, he appealed to Sunni Arab
leaders to
unite to against extremist
movements like
ISIS and al-Qaida and other
militant groups
backed by Shiite Iran.
The centerpiece was a speech the
White House
billed as an address to the
Muslim world.
DONALD TRUMP: A better future is
only possible
if your nations drive out the
terrorists and
extremists.
Drive them out.
Drive them out of your places of
worship.
Drive them out of your
communities.
Drive them out of your holy
land.
And drive them out of this
earth.
JOHN YANG: It represented a big
shift in tone
and temper from the campaign,
when he condemned
Islam for hating America.
DONALD TRUMP: This is not a
battle between
different faiths, different
sects or different
civilizations.
This is a battle between
barbaric criminals
who seek to obliterate human
life and decent
people, all in the name of
religion, people
that want to protect it life and
want to protect
their religion.
This is a battle between good
and evil.
JOHN YANG: Mr. Trump also joined
the leaders
of Egypt and Saudi Arabia to
open a center
aimed at combating online
militant ideology
and messaging.
The president's Saudi visit
coincided with
the reelection of Hassan Rouhani
as president
of Iran, which was the target of
much of Mr.
Trump's rhetoric.
Today, Rouhani contrasted the
heavy Iranian
voter turnout with the lack of
elections in
Mr. Trump's host kingdom.
HASSAN ROUHANI, Iranian
President (through
translator): He has gone to a
country where
I think the word election has no
meaning for
them.
They have never seen a ballot
box.
I hope that the day will come
that Saudi Arabia
will adopt this path.
JOHN YANG: Like the Israelis,
the Saudis also
welcome the shift in the U.S.
approach to
Iran that the change in leaders
brings, one
reason for the opulent Saudi
welcome for Mr.
Trump, which included a
traditional sword
dance to underscore the
friendship Saudi King
Salman extended to the
president.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm John
Yang.
JUDY WOODRUFF: I spoke a little
earlier with
Tamara Keith of NPR, who is in
Jerusalem.
And I started by asking if
President Trump
got as impressive a welcome in
Israel as he
received in Saudi Arabia.
TAMARA KEITH, National Public
Radio: Absolutely.
There was another big red carpet
at the airport
just like there was in Saudi
Arabia.
There was a marching band.
And then, tonight, there were
fireworks over
the Old City, though it's not
clear that those
were really for President Trump,
but probably
for Jerusalem Day.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, Tam, I want
to ask you
about the president's surprising
comments
when he was with Prime Minister
Netanyahu
earlier today, and he spoke
about his disclosure
of classified information with
Russian officials.
TAMARA KEITH: So, this was one
of the times
when reporters come into the
room -- it's
basically a photo-op.
And they made some brief
remarks, and then
a reporter from Bloomberg
shouted out a question,
asking Prime Minister Netanyahu
if he was
concerned about sharing
intelligence with
the United States.
Well, both leaders were eager to
respond.
And President Trump said, well,
I never said
anything about Israel when I
gave information
to the Russians, which is an
interesting point
to make, because although
there's been reporting
that it was Israel, none of the
reporting
ever said that President Trump
had revealed
to the Russian foreign minister
that it was
Israel's information that he was
revealing.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, he was
essentially confirming
it with his own remarks.
Tam, I want to ask you about --
go back to
the Saudi Arabia portion of this
trip, because
it was clear that the president
was going
out of his way to avoid using a
term that
we heard frequently from him on
the campaign
trail, radical Islamic
terrorism.
What do you know about that?
TAMARA KEITH: On the campaign
trail, he frequently
criticized Hillary Clinton and
President Obama
for not saying those words.
He would, say the words radical
Islamic terrorism.
But in this speech, he carefully
avoided saying
those words, though he kind of
stumbled right
around that section of the
speech and departed
from the prepared remarks.
Later, an aide said he's an
exhausted guy,
and attributed it to that, and
not any sort
of purposeful going off-script.
He certainly seemed to be toning
down the
language.
He wasn't as directly critical
of Saudi Arabia
as he had been during the
campaign either,
though an aide, a senior
administration official
insisted that, no, he wasn't
actually toning
things down.
He was actually being tougher.
But it certainly seemed
toned-down.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, Tam,
finally, it was -- in
that regard, it was also clear
to those who
were listening that he didn't
bring up human
rights in Saudi Arabia.
TAMARA KEITH: Yes, he didn't
bring it up certainly
in a big way.
There was one short sentence
that mentioned
the oppression of women and
Christians and
others.
But it wasn't a centerpiece of
the speech.
It was barely a paragraph, sort
of a sentence.
And there were other phrases in
the speech
that made it clear that they're
not emphasizing
human rights, saying that he
wasn't there
to lecture countries, and that
he was looking
for partners, not perfection.
And many people took that as a
signal that
he was sending to the leaders in
the room
that he wants to work with them
to counter
ISIS and he's willing, at least
on some level,
to not put human rights in their
face.
What the administration says is
that he's
approaching this quietly and
strongly and
that by sort of easing into it,
he might able
to be -- have a bigger impact.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Tamara Keith
reporting from
Israel, the second leg of
President Trump's
trip abroad.
TAMARA KEITH: Glad to be with
you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And we will have
more on the
president's trip right after the
news summary.
In the day's other news:
President Trump's
former national security
adviser, Michael
Flynn, invoked his right against
self-incrimination,
and refused to give documents to
the Senate
Intelligence Committee.
It involves potential ties
between the Trump
campaign and Russian officials.
But Flynn's lawyers cited a --
quote -- "escalating
public frenzy" and they said
that any testimony
he provides could be used
against him.
It's reported that two other
former Trump
associates, Paul Manafort and
Roger Stone,
have turned over documents to
the committee.
Meanwhile, Democrat Elijah
Cummings, on the
House Oversight Committee, says
that government
documents suggest that Flynn
misled Pentagon
investigators about his income
from Russian
sources.
North Korea says it's ready to
start mass-producing
new medium-range missiles.
State media today called it an
answer to the
Trump administration.
On Sunday, the North test-fired
a missile
capable of reaching Japan and
major U.S. military
bases there.
The U.N. Security Council
condemned the launch
as -- quote -- "highly
destabilizing."
Iran's newly reelected President
Hassan Rouhani
is calling for better relations
with the United
States.
But he says first the Trump
administration
has to get its bearings.
He spoke in Tehran, three days
after he easily
defeated a conservative
challenger backed
by hard-liners.
HASSAN ROUHANI, Iranian
President (through
translator): Iran and America,
over the last
almost 40 years, have traveled a
curvy road
together.
We are waiting for the U.S.
government to
become stable intellectually.
I hope it can settle down so
that we can more
accurately pass judgments on
their leaders
in Washington.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Also today,
Iranian reports
said that reformist supporters
of Rouhani
swept all the local offices in
Tehran and
did well in other cities as
well.
Back in this country, the U.S.
Supreme Court
has struck down two North
Carolina congressional
districts over racial
gerrymandering.
The ruling upheld a lower court
finding that
Republican state lawmakers
lumped black voters
into the districts to weaken
their clout elsewhere.
The districts have already been
redrawn.
The state legislature in Texas
is nearing
approval of a transgender
bathroom bill similar
to North Carolina's measure that
sparked national
outrage.
The Texas bill limits children
in public and
charter schools to bathrooms
that correspond
with their official gender at
birth.
In last night's debate,
Statehouse members
argued over whether the bill
amounts to discrimination.
CHRIS PADDIE (R), Texas State
Representative:
There is absolutely no intent,
and I would
argue nothing in this language,
that discriminates
against anyone.
In fact, it makes sure that
there are reasonable
accommodations for all children.
SENFRONIA THOMPSON (D), Texas
State Representative:
Bathrooms, white, colored.
I was living through that era of
not only
America, but Texas history as
well.
Bathrooms divided us then, and
it divides
us now.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The bill cleared
the Statehouse
today and went to the Senate for
final approval.
Meanwhile, the Texas legislature
also voted
to let publicly funded foster
care and adoption
groups refuse to place adopted
children with
parents who are gay, unmarried
or non-Christian.
An elite New Hampshire prep
school has acknowledged
sexual abuse of students by 13
former teachers
and staff dating back decades.
St. Paul's School in Concord
today released
results of an independent
investigation.
It comes amid reports of similar
scandals
at several other private
boarding schools
across New England and the
Northeast.
In economic news, Ford Motor
Company replaced
Mark Fields as CEO after just
two years, amid
doubts about the automaker's
direction.
The new CEO is Jim Hackett, a
former office
furniture executive.
And on Wall Street, the Dow
Jones industrial
average gained 90 points to
close near 20895.
The Nasdaq rose almost 50, and
the S&P 500
added 12.
And after 150 years almost, the
Ringling Bros.
Barnum & Bailey Circus held its
final show
last night.
The Greatest Show on Earth faced
declining
attendance and high operating
costs, as well
as protests from animal rights
groups.
The last show on Sunday, held
just outside
New York City, received a
standing ovation.
Performers hugged, as the
ringmaster sang
"Auld Lang Syne."
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
President
Trump abroad attempting to reset
relations
in the Middle East; how Medicaid
cuts could
trickle down to students with
disabilities;
it's Politics Monday, a look at
the storm
left at home while the president
is overseas;
and much more.
During the presidential
campaign, candidate
Trump said he'd strengthen
relations with
Middle Eastern countries and do
a better job
fighting what he called radical
Islamic terrorism.
So, with the president in Saudi
Arabia this
weekend and meeting with Arab
leaders, we
thought we'd ask, what kind of
change in U.S.
policy is the president making?
For that, we turn to Daniel
Benjamin.
He was ambassador at large and
coordinator
for counterterrorism at the U.S.
State Department
during the Obama administration.
He's now at Dartmouth College.
Elliott Abrams, he served in the
Reagan and
George W. Bush administrations.
He's now a senior fellow at the
Council on
Foreign Relations.
And Robin Wright, she is a
fellow at the U.S.
Institute of Peace, as well as a
contributing
writer for "The New Yorker"
magazine.
And we welcome all three of you
back to the
program.
So, we have been talking about
-- a little
bit, Elliott Abrams, about the
president's
shifting language in how he
talks about terrorism,
extremism.
But what I want to ask the three
of you is,
how much of a shift in policy is
what Donald
-- President Trump is saying in
his -- particularly
in that speech in Saudi Arabia?
How much of a shift in policy
would that be?
ELLIOTT ABRAMS, Council on
Foreign Relations:
There is a shift, I would say,
from the Obama
policy, which was much more open
to friendship
or a better relationship with
Iran and wasn't
casting Iran as a central
problem in the Middle
East.
In Saudi Arabia, the president
said very much
Iran is the problem.
The king of Saudi Arabia then
said the same
thing, Iran is the problem.
Now, of course, we're hearing it
from Prime
Minister Netanyahu.
This isn't a change, I would
say, from Bush
policy, actually, but it is a
change from
Obama policy, which was centered
on improving
the relationship with Iran.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Daniel Benjamin,
how do you
see what the president had to
say?
DANIEL BENJAMIN, Former State
Department Coordinator
for Counterterrorism: Well, I
agree with Elliott
about the tilt towards the Sunni
Arabs.
He's gone all in, in terms of
standing with
them and with the Israelis
against Iran.
I think that brings with it some
challenges.
I think it's also noteworthy
that he pushed
the Saudis and others to do more
against terrorism
themselves, but it was quite
interesting that
the way that he described
terrorism, it was
really kind of flat.
It was in very good vs. evil
terms, but no
larger discussion of what the
drivers of terrorism
are, no discussion about bad
governance, about
economic stagnation, about any
repression.
And, as a result, it leaves the
impression
that this is going to be purely
about military
law enforcement, and not
anything else, which
is really at odds with the
policy we had,
which was that you can't shoot
your way out
of this.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Robin Wright,
you're nodding
your head.
ROBIN WRIGHT, Senior Fellow,
U.S. Institute
of Peace: Absolutely.
I think this is -- this differs
in significant
ways.
First of all, it walks away from
the kind
of nation-building of George
Bush or the democracy
promotion of Barack Obama.
It takes a very one-dimensional
approach to
extremism, which is
militaristic, kill them
all, drive them back.
It is -- doesn't factor in the
kind of economic
grievances, the political sense
among many
in the region that their
governments don't
represent them.
President Trump is basically
siding with the
autocratic regimes in the region
which have
been the most repressive, and
which have not
devoted much time or energy to
some of the
broad solutions of the 21st
century.
And so this is a huge departure
from the past.
And I think that it opens up the
United States
to some vulnerability in the
same way.
We're once again looking for
stability, rather
than the kinds of regimes that
reflect our
own values.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Is this an
approach, Elliott
Abrams, that is likely to work?
These regimes have had plenty of
opportunities
to come together against
terrorism, against
extremism.
Is this new appeal from
President Trump likely
to bring results?
ELLIOTT ABRAMS: Well, there can
be better
cooperation, let's say, on
terrorist financing.
There can be better cooperation
on the military
and police side.
But I think Robin is right.
If terrorists were coming down
from outer
space, then the military
approach would be
fine.
But they're coming from the very
countries
whose leaders he was addressing.
And he didn't discuss at all,
why is that
and what can be done about it in
your countries?
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, given that,
Dan Benjamin,
are we -- are these countries
just basically
left to ignore the president?
I mean, has the expectation been
raised for
them to do something now or not?
DANIEL BENJAMIN: Well, he has
suggested that.
One of the reasons that the Gulf
Arabs are
so excited about Donald Trump is
that he has
signaled that he's giving them a
complete
pass on human rights issues.
So, we could well see more
repression.
Over the long term, that doesn't
mean less
terrorism.
That may mean more terrorism.
But he's really just saying, you
know, do
what you need to and be there
for us when
we ask.
That's also a problem because,
over the last
five or six years, they have
paid a lot more
attention to their sectarian
rivalry with
Iran than they have to Sunni
extremism.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And speaking of
that, Robin,
that's come up in all of this
discussion.
Does it make sense in the long
run for the
president to pit basically Sunni
against the
Iran regime?
ROBIN WRIGHT: This is the great
danger.
The United States is often
faulted with fostering
this sectarian divide between
Sunnis and Shiites
by its intervention in Iraq in
2003.
And now the administration is
taking a very
definitive stand on the side of
the Sunnis
against predominantly Shiite
Iran.
And this, I think, is going to
deepen tensions,
rather than try to defuse them.
And the great danger is that you
see not only
tensions within societies that
don't feel
that they're represented, but a
deepening
regional conflict.
After all, the Saudi-Iran
rivalry plays out
in every major conflict in the
Middle East,
in Syria, in Iraq, in Yemen.
And we're not going to find
solution to any
of these crises unless there's a
much more
collaborative effort that brings
in all the
major powers in the region.
And so that's one of the
challenges.
He talks a game about finding
peace and about
stabilizing the region, fighting
extremism,
but how do you do that when
you're actually
adding fuel to the flames?
JUDY WOODRUFF: And what about,
Elliott?
ELLIOTT ABRAMS: Well, there, I
would say I
disagree, because I think the
problem, seen
from the Israeli point of view,
seen from
the Sunni Arab point of view,
seen from the
president's point of view, is a
remarkable
effort by Iran in Iraq, in
Syria, in Lebanon,
in Yemen, in Bahrain, to create
trouble.
I think they are really a
problem for all
of those countries and for us.
This is a country that is still
saying death
to America.
I think the president's focus on
that is reasonable.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, Daniel
Benjamin, pick
up on that.
What is the meat on the bones
that needs to
come now for something to grow
out of this
that advances the cause, the
anti-extremist
cause?
DANIEL BENJAMIN: Well, I'm
skeptical we're
going to get there, because one
of the things
that President Trump apparently
didn't do
while he was in Saudi Arabia was
talk to the
Saudis about the activities that
they carry
on that actually promote
extremism, specific
with their missionary activities
around the
world to provide mosques,
itinerant preachers,
curricular materials and the
like, which have
really stoked the rise of a more
hard-edge
Islam.
And I don't think we're going to
see anything
from this administration on that
score.
And the other thing is, on the
sectarianism,
if it just gets worse, it's
going to undermine
regional stability.
And it could threaten the
nuclear accord in
the region.
And that ultimately would be bad
news for
everyone.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We even haven't
mentioned the
elections in Iran, Robin, but
Iran has just
reelected the more moderate
candidate, Mr.
Rouhani.
At the same time, the president
is painting
Iran as the enemy.
ROBIN WRIGHT: And he's painting
that picture
in a country that doesn't hold
democratic
elections, where women can't
even drive, much
less participate or run for
office.
And Iran has had a female vice
president.
The contrast is very stark.
There's no question that Iran is
a big problem
for many in the international
community, its
support of extremism, its
missile development
program, its abuse of civil
rights.
I don't think anyone disputes
that.
But there is a deep contrast.
And remember that Saudi Arabia
is a country
that developed or promoted the
Wahhabi ideology
that was the bed of the place
that gave us
the ideology of al-Qaida and
ISIS, and so
that we need to kind of be
rational or reasonable
when we talk about who are the
good guys and
the bad guys.
A lot of them share the blame.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, there's so
much here.
We're going to continue to look
at what the
president had to say.
Thank you, all three, Robin
Wright, Daniel
Benjamin, Elliott Abrams.
Thank you.
ROBIN WRIGHT: Thank you.
ELLIOTT ABRAMS: You're welcome.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Let's move to the
president's
domestic agenda now.
Later tonight, his
administration will release
his first full budget plan,
which lays out
his priorities for spending and
taxes.
Congress will have the final
say, but this
lays down an important marker
for the coming
year.
Early reporting suggests Mr.
Trump's proposal
will feature some big changes,
including substantial
spending cuts and a shift in
priorities overall.
Lisa Desjardins has been
reporting for us,
and she is here now to give us a
preview.
So, Lisa, what's different about
this budget
and what is different about the
way they're
approaching it?
LISA DESJARDINS: This is a very
dramatic proposal
the president is making to
Congress.
He would significantly increase
military spending
and significantly decrease most
spending in
other domestic agencies.
Now, as part of this, he is
trying to change
the way people look at
budgeting.
Sources, congressional sources
are giving
me all this information.
They say he's trying to say,
don't just look
who is the recipient of a
program.
Look at those who are funding
it, taxpayers,
and ask, do taxpayers think this
is worth
it?
That's a sign of cuts to come.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And we're hearing
big changes
to Medicaid, health care for the
poor.
What do we know about that?
LISA DESJARDINS: These
congressional sources
say the president will propose
additional
cuts to Medicaid on top of what
is already
in the House Republican bill.
We have talked about that
extensively.
There's a lot of shifts in that
bill, but
essentially it would likely
mean, according
to the Congressional Budget
Office, millions
fewer Americans on Medicaid.
The president plan would have
additional decreases
to that.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, finally,
Lisa, we're hearing
about several other changes to
the so-called
social safety net.
LISA DESJARDINS: That's right.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What are you
hearing about
that and why?
LISA DESJARDINS: A couple of big
programs
to watch, the Earned Income Tax
Credit.
Again, congressional sources say
the president
feels that there should be more
responsibility,
accountability in these
programs, and he's
going to require that everyone
in that program
have a Social Security number.
Who does that affect?
Undocumented immigrants.
It could also affect their
children, some
critics point out.
One other program, Judy, SNAP,
lots of times
referred to as food stamps.
The president is going to
propose that states
share more in that cost.
That would be a big difference.
And one key to all of this, it's
a dramatic
proposal, but Congress ends up
deciding all
of these funding debates.
And when I talk to some
Republicans in Congress
on Friday, they were ready for
this dramatic
proposal.
And they said a lot of these
cuts will not
pass there.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All right, Lisa
Desjardins,
again, this comes out tonight.
We will be able to talk much
more about it
tomorrow.
Thank you so much.
And, as we just heard, Medicaid
cuts are a
key part of the president's
proposed budget.
Mr. Trump's budget assumes that
cuts already
in the House Republican health
care bill will
eventually become law and take
effect.
We have been looking at the
potential impact
of the bill.
And, tonight, we focus on what
it could mean
for schools, and particularly
special education.
William Brangham has our
conversation.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Special
education just wasn't
part of the debate over the
House GOP's health
care bill.
But special education is hugely
reliant on
Medicaid , and that bill could
trigger major
cuts to Medicaid, up to $880
billion over
10 years.
So, what would this mean for the
millions
of public school kids who
receive special
ed services?
I'm joined now by Sasha
Pudelski, who is with
the School Superintendents
Association.
Welcome to the "NewsHour."
SASHA PUDELSKI, The School
Superintendents
Association: Thanks.
So happy to be here.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: So, I was
really surprised
by this.
I didn't appreciate fully how
reliant special
ed service are on Medicaid.
Can you give us a sense of how
crucial they
are to those budgets?
SASHA PUDELSKI: Absolutely.
So, special education funding
has always been
low.
We have never met our federal
commitment to
school districts to fund special
education.
And about 30 years ago, the
federal government
decided that they would allow to
start to
bill Medicaid for some of the
therapies in
particular that are very costly
to provide
special education students.
And so school districts have
been reliant
on Medicaid to supplement some
of the special
education funding they receive
for a very
long time.
It's standard practice in many
districts.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: So, they spend
this money.
And then they go to the
government say, hey,
we did this.
We provided these services.
Please reimburse us.
SASHA PUDELSKI: Exactly.
So, it's not a one-for-one
match, by any means,
but it's a substantial amount
they receive
back.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Generally
speaking, who
are the kids that we're talking
about here,
and what kinds of services are
we talking
about?
SASHA PUDELSKI: It's virtually
every special
education child, because the
things that Medicaid
can cover run from therapies
like mental health
therapy, speech therapy,
physical therapy,
to equipment that they may need,
hearing aids.
It may run from wheelchairs to
school buses,
actually, that provide
specialized transportation
for kids.
So, the services are vast,
despite the levels
of funding.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: So, we don't
know right
now.
The House GOP bill has to go
through the Senate.
It's obviously going to get
changed quite
a bit.
But let's assume that there are
still major
cuts to Medicaid in whatever
comes out of
the Congress.
What is the main concern for the
school districts?
SASHA PUDELSKI: The main concern
is, by this
major federal disinvestment in
Medicaid, we're
going to have states having to
pick up the
tab.
And if school districts are
competing with
hospitals and clinics and other
providers
for scarce dollars, I don't see
how a governor
or state Medicaid director or
state legislature
is going to decide schools need
this money,
not a hospital, not a doctor.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The
Republicans would argue,
we have federal deficits that
are going to
be massive in the future, and we
have to address
some of these programs like
Medicaid, and
that these are cuts that are
just fiscally
smart.
I mean, how do you respond to
that?
SASHA PUDELSKI: It's not kids
that are breaking
the Medicaid bank, if the bank
is even being
broken, which I contend it's
not.
But when you look at who
benefits from Medicaid,
46 percent of Medicaid
beneficiaries are kids.
But one out of every five
dollars spent on
Medicaid is spent on children.
So it's a really efficient way
of spending
dollars on children's health
care in this
country.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Let's say
these cuts do
come down, and school districts
have to find
some way to compensate.
What is your sense, from talking
to school
administrators around the
country?
How are they going to make up
the shortfall?
SASHA PUDELSKI: So, the
situation is rather
bleak.
We surveyed 1,000 school leaders
earlier this
year to ask them exactly that
question.
And they told us that they
believe services
for kids will be recused.
In some cases, professionals
will be laid
off who work with those kids,
like the school
nurse, for example, whose salary
may be subsidized
substantially by Medicaid.
They indicated they may have to
raise taxes
in order to compensate for this
loss.
And some districts can do that,
and others
just can't.
So, it's going to be a major
financial hit,
not just on the special
education budget,
but on the general education
budget, because
the general education budget
will have to
subsidize the loss of funding in
special education.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: So, what
you're talking
about is really cuts that are
really not just
for this one dedicated
population, but for
potentially every student in a
public school
district.
SASHA PUDELSKI: Absolutely.
When you go to a school nurse's
office, they
don't ask, are you
Medicaid-eligible?
They take your temperature and
find out whether
you need to go home.
So this is someone who benefits
every child,
just like a mental health
practitioner in
the school.
And when we no longer can afford
their services
because they're subsidized via
Medicaid, every
child in that building will be
hurt.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: All right,
Sasha Pudelski
of the School Superintendents
Association,
thank you so much.
SASHA PUDELSKI: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour":
Tunisians revive
their capital's old city center
dating back
to the seventh century; and a
retiree nearing
100 years old finds a sweet way
to make a
difference.
But, first, for more on the
president's overseas
trip and the troubles he's
facing back here
at home, it's time for Politics
Monday.
This week, I'm joined by Stu
Rothenberg, senior
editor at Inside Elections, and
Susan Page,
Washington bureau chief for USA
Today.
And welcome both of you back to
the program.
So, I was going to begin by
asking you about
the trip and how much that
overshadows what's
going on here at home, but just
in the last
few moments, we have seen that
The Washington
Post is reporting, Susan, that
the president
-- this has literally just come
out moments
ago -- asked intelligence
chiefs, two of them,
to push back against any story,
any allegation
of FBI collusion.
He asked both Dan Coats, who is
the director
of national intelligence, and
Admiral Michael
Rogers, who is the director of
the National
Security Agency.
The Washington Post story says
that both of
them refused to comply.
They both said it was
inappropriate.
They are not commenting on this
story, but
The Washington Post is running
it as a headline.
SUSAN PAGE, Washington Bureau
Chief, USA Today:
And this, of course, is entirely
consistent
what we have heard the president
ask James
Comey to do as FBI director, to
try to help
him with this kind of P.R.
problems with this
Russia investigation.
It's consistent with that and is
one more
example of how you can be on a
foreign trip,
you can be giving big speeches,
but you cannot
escape the cloud that is over
your presidency
when it comes to this disclosure
after disclosure
on this Russia investigation.
And that is going to be the
case, I think,
for the foreseeable future for
this president.
JUDY WOODRUFF: I mean, we are
starting to
get the sense, Stu, that no
matter how much
we begin to talk about other
things, the budget,
which we did report on earlier
in the program
tonight, and of course the
president's trip,
that this Russia investigation
and how the
president and the White House
handled it is
just the story that keeps on
unfolding.
STUART ROTHENBERG, Inside
Elections: Right.
Well, Republicans complain that
the national
media is spending too much time
on this subject
and we should be talking about
other issues,
but this is the focus of
attention for a reason.
We're talking about the
president of the United
States and his aides'
appropriate behavior,
inappropriate behavior, illegal
behavior.
We don't know.
But this is a giant story.
And saying, well, there are
other issues,
yes, and we should cover them.
But this is certainly the story,
the story
du jour.
JUDY WOODRUFF: I mean -- excuse
me -- even
on the trip, Susan, the
president today confirmed
when he was with Prime Minister
Netanyahu
in Israel that he, in essence,
said, I didn't
say the word Israeli when I
talked about intelligence
that I shared with Russian
officials.
He in a way is keeping some of
this alive.
SUSAN PAGE: This is one more
self-inflicted
wound on the part of President
Trump, because
he wasn't even asked this
question.
This was a question posed by an
American reporter
to Benjamin Netanyahu.
And the president, President
Trump, jumps
in to say, this is a bad story,
I never said
the word Israel.
Well, first of all, the stories
at the time
did not say he used the word
Israel.
It just said that he disclosed
highly confidential
intelligence issues.
Secondly, this confirms -- in
effect, confirms
that Israel was the source of
this intelligence,
something U.S. officials have
refused to do
on the record.
It does a third thing, puts a
spotlight right
back on the story on a day when
you had a
rather emotional and successful
visit to Israel.
Now that's been really
overshadowed.
STUART ROTHENBERG: You know,
these kind of
trips have been used by previous
presidents
to -- so that they go
internationally.
This is the area that the
president has most
authority in, foreign policy,
national security.
Presidents look presidential
when they're
meeting leaders of other
countries.
I noted that Richard Nixon took
a 10-day,
seven-country trip in June of
1974, and then
he came back to Washington, went
back on another
trip to...
JUDY WOODRUFF: This is two
months before.
STUART ROTHENBERG: ... to the
Soviet Union.
Yes, the Judiciary Committee was
-- House
Judiciary was meeting.
And when he came back was three
weeks later,
and he was impeached.
This president cannot get out of
his own way.
Is that too strong a thing to
say?
He continues to bring back the
focus on himself.
And a trip is a good idea and
presidents need
to do that.
But it's not going to make
Americans forget
about the underlying problem he
has.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Susan, do we know
yet how much
this is going to affect the
president's substantive
agenda?
We were talking earlier with
Lisa Desjardins
about the budget proposal.
We're going to hear more about
that tonight.
We know the president,
Republicans on the
Hill very much want to pass a
health care
reform law.
How is all this affecting that?
SUSAN PAGE: It does two things
that are damaging.
One, it distracts attention.
So, you're paying attention to
this, not to
the details of the health care
bill or what
might be included in a tax cut
package.
Another thing is, it starts to
chip away at
the president's approval rating.
And that is important because
members of Congress
keep a close look at the
president's approval
rating to figure out how much
they should
fear him, how much attention do
they have
to pay to him, how much
political clout does
he have.
The president's approval rating
today in the
Gallup poll, which does a daily
rolling three-day
average, was 37 percent, which
is a dismal
approval rating for a president.
And it's just a bit lower than
it's been.
It was about 40.
It had been about 40 for a long
time.
It's beginning to get just a
little bit lower.
So, even among his core
supporters, many of
whom are sticking with him, he's
seeing some
attrition.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Right.
Stu, you have spent a lifetime
studying members
of Congress and how they think
about how to
vote and what they are going to
do and their
reelection prospects.
What is the calculus for the
Republicans right
now?
STUART ROTHENBERG: If you tell
me who is going
to win the Montana special
election later
this week, and then the Georgia
special election
next month, I will have a better
idea of what
the impact is.
But I think Susan is exactly
right.
Look, there are Republicans and
conservatives
in safe districts that are going
to stick
with the president and are
sticking with him,
just as some Republicans stuck
to Richard
Nixon right to the very end.
But those Republicans in swing
districts,
those who worry about Republican
turnout,
Democratic turnout in districts
or states
that can flip, they are nervous.
They will get more nervous.
This is not really a
distraction.
It's kind of defining this
presidency now.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What is it going
to take, though?
Is it a drip, drip, drip...
(CROSSTALK)
STUART ROTHENBERG: No, I think
it may simply
be time.
It's funny.
People in the national media
talk -- look
at every poll as if one is going
to show a
dramatic turn in public opinion.
The president has only been in
office now
four months.
He hasn't been in long.
So, you give this another four
months, eight
months, and some of his
supporters may start
to take the criticism more
seriously.
Right now, it's easy for them to
say, I voted
for him.
He's trying.
It's the national media's fault.
But, four months from now, or
six months from
now, I think things might be
different.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But Stu is right,
Susan.
The loyal Trump supporters,
people from districts
where people -- and there was
another story.
I read another story just
yesterday about
this in Kentucky, several
communities in Kentucky,
where Donald Trump received high
poll numbers,
I mean, high vote totals, back
in November.
He is still very popular.
SUSAN PAGE: And, of course, the
idea that
he's being embattled by the
national news
media or among Democrats, that
doesn't really
hurt President Trump.
But what could hurt President
Trump is if
he doesn't deliver on the
promises he made
to these voters.
And that would include bringing
back manufacturing
jobs, making their lives better,
bringing
down the cost of health care.
Those are the things on which
President Trump
is going to be measured by his
supporters.
And the fact that he's got this
cloud of scandal
over him makes it harder for him
to deliver
to them on those issues.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Politics Monday.
Susan Page, Stu Rothenberg,
great to have
you both.
SUSAN PAGE: Thanks.
STUART ROTHENBERG: Thanks, Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And now to a
story about history
and culture in Tunisia, the
birthplace of
the Arab spring.
Its democracy is new and
fragile, and its
economy has been hurt by
terrorist acts that
have scared away tourists.
But among the signs of hope, a
rise in citizen
efforts to take part in the
nation's political
and cultural life.
Jeffrey Brown has our story.
It's part of his ongoing series
Culture at
Risk.
JEFFREY BROWN: The Medina of
Tunis, the old
center of the city, dating back
to the seventh
century, its narrow walkways,
vibrant colors,
and grand architecture evoke a
rich past.
Now nestled within a sprawling
modern city,
the Medina remains a home to
some 100,000
residents, 15,000 homes, 700
monuments, and
abundant commerce within its
sprawling souks,
or markets.
For hundreds of years, places
like this were
the heart of life in the Arab
world.
The question today is how to
preserve something
of that old character, even as
the society
around them changes.
Architect Zoubeir Mouhli grew up
here in the
Medina, and now heads an
organization to preserve
it.
ZOUBEIR MOUHLI, Association for
the Preservation
of the Medina (through
translator): When I
was a student, I dreamed of
working in the
Medina because I knew there were
so many hidden
things people didn't know about
that are incredibly
valuable.
JEFFREY BROWN: For him, this
place represents
a way of life, an alternative to
the modern
city.
ZOUBEIR MOUHLI (through
translator): There
is no soul there.
Everything is done for the cars,
not for the
people, not for the pedestrians,
people who want to see each
other, to talk
to each other, to go and have a
coffee together.
All this is so important to me.
JEFFREY BROWN: Dramatic change
came to the
Medina starting in the 1950s, as
the era of
French rule ended.
Many laborers from the
countryside moved in
seeking work, while elites and
those with
means left for the new suburbs,
which continue
to develop today.
The Medina was ignored, and
slowly decayed.
ZOUBEIR MOUHLI (through
translator): The Medina
was considered an archaic space
that was contrary
to the country's modernization,
and even the
cause of our underdevelopment
and the reason
for the French protectorate.
JEFFREY BROWN: By the time the
Medina was
added to a U.N. list of places
of special
cultural importance in 1979,
more than half
its buildings were in disrepair
or ruins.
But changes in the country are
also changing
the Medina.
In late 2010, a Tunisian fruit
vendor set
himself ablaze, setting off a
chain of protests
that overturned the country's
dictator, Abidine
Ben Ali, and spread across the
region as the
Arab Spring.
Tunisia has been the only
country thus far
to successfully transition out
of protests
into a democracy.
Among much else, that unleashed
new civic
pride and an interest in
preserving the country's
culture, one influenced by
Roman, Ottoman,
Arabic and European traditions.
LEILA BEN GACEM, Tunisia: This
house was on
sale in 2006.
I bought it from a family that
lived here
for 300 years.
JEFFREY BROWN: Three hundred?
LEILA BEN GACEM: Yes.
JEFFREY BROWN: For Leila Ben
Gacem, that meant
rehabilitating an old home to
turn it into
a boutique hotel, a project that
required
working with local artisans,
tile specialists,
woodworkers, gypsum carvers, who
understood
the materials and artistic
styles.
LEILA BEN GACEM: These stones
could be recycled
from the destroyed site of
Carthage.
JEFFREY BROWN: You mean the
ancient archaeological
site of Carthage, yes, not far
from us.
LEILA BEN GACEM: Yes.
The tiles could have came with
the Andalusians.
JEFFREY BROWN: Yes, in Spain.
LEILA BEN GACEM: In Spain.
The arches could have came from
the Ottomans.
So it's the blend that makes
Tunisia today.
JEFFREY BROWN: It was difficult
work.
The house had to be entirely
retrofitted with
modern plumbing and electricity.
Not a good place for a car.
LEILA BEN GACEM: No, that's why
taxi drivers
hate to drive in here.
JEFFREY BROWN: And the area
faces all kinds
of challenges, including
maintaining enough
infrastructure to hold onto old
businesses
and attract new investment.
LEILA BEN GACEM: Since the birth
of the Medina
in the seventh century, eighth
century, there
always been an ecosystem of
traders, of artisans,
of businesses.
So the trading sectors change
with time.
And I think to convert the
Medina into a cultural
artistic destination, that needs
a whole new
ecosystem to be developed now.
JEFFREY BROWN: Ben Gacem's doing
her part.
She's already working on a
second guest house
and has opened a workspace
nearby to help
transfer some of the skills
being lost.
On Saturday mornings, there's a
calligraphy
class and next door a workshop
on bookbinding,
taught by Mohamed Ben Sassi,
whose shop is
just down the street.
He's thought to be the last
bookbinder working
in the Medina, and is eager to
reach a new
generation.
MOHAMED BEN SASSI, Tunisia
(through translator):
There is nobody, no one left.
For 40 years, I worked in the
national library,
and there was nobody to do this
job, 40 years.
The book will never go away.
It has witnessed many gales and
thunderbolts
and disasters.
It is still here.
JEFFREY BROWN: Up the street is
a beautiful,
but dilapidated building called
La Rachidia,
opened in the 1930s and once one
of the most
famous concert venues in North
Africa.
Here, volunteers are digitizing
sheet music,
historical documents, concert
posters and
photographs found sitting in
boxes, saving
traditional Tunisian music known
as malouf.
And then there's a project
called MedinaPedia
in the belly of an old Christian
church, where
another group of volunteers is
documenting
every building and monument in
the area, researching
famous residents, and uploading
that information
to Wikipedia, a variety of
projects, committed
people, young and old.
Everyone we spoke to said it
will be important
to move forward in a way that
maintains the
character and the inhabitants of
the Medina,
even while trying to attract
tourists to a
country in desperate need of the
economic
boost they bring.
Despite the many challenges the
government
here faces, Leila Ben Gacem says
cultural
heritage should continue to be
one of its
priorities.
LEILA BEN GACEM: The government
underestimates
the potential of heritage and
culture in creating
opportunities, and maybe they
even think of
it as something for elite or
something as
a luxury.
In the meantime, civil society
is very active
today in investing, investing
time, money,
energy, advocacy to restore such
beautiful
spaces and bring back the magic
to the Medina.
JEFFREY BROWN: A magic found in
every tile
and stone.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
Jeffrey Brown
in the Medina of Tunis.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now to something
sweet.
More often than not, a dessert
is better when
you share it.
That's the thinking of one man
who uses baking
to reach out to his community.
From PBS station NET in
Nebraska, Dennis Kellogg
explains.
DENNIS KELLOGG: If you're
looking for a good
dessert in Hastings, you can
find plenty of
places to get a sweet treat.
But some of the city's tastiest
pies and cakes
come from the kitchen of this
small home,
where Leo Kellner has lived for
more than
six decades.
WOMAN: MDNM /Thank you, Leo.
MAN: MDNM /Thank you, Leo.
WOMAN: Red velvet is my
favorite.
DENNIS KELLOGG: The doorbell
seems to be always
ringing here, as friends stop by
to pick up
one of Leo's culinary creations.
WOMAN: Thank you so much for
making this cake.
WOMAN: Thank you again.
DENNIS KELLOGG: Leo spends his
days in the
kitchen, gladly baking hundreds
of pies and
cakes every year.
LEO KELLNER, Baker: My crust is
flaky, and
tastes like -- more or less like
a cookie.
DENNIS KELLOGG: And Leo Kellner
is 98-years-old.
LEO KELLNER: I have got to have
something
to do.
I would be dead if I wouldn't be
doing this.
I lay at night in bed and think
how I can
change things, make things
better.
I have changed my pie three
times, the apple
pie.
DENNIS KELLOGG: Leo grew up
during tough times
in the 1930s, watching his mom
and sister
bake with whatever ingredients
they happened
to have.
He spent a lifetime working with
irrigation
and grain-drying businesses.
He didn't retire until he was
92.
That's when Madelon, his wife of
72 years,
got sick and passed away.
LEO KELLNER: I started about
four months or
so after my wife died.
I was sitting here not knowing
what to do
with myself.
I was used to working.
And I had given up what I was
doing, was kind
of sitting here in the house and
I said to
myself, I can bake.
DENNIS KELLOGG: He made 144
apple pies that
first year, and hasn't stopped
since.
You might think it provides a
great retirement
income for Leo, but the thing
is, he doesn't
charge a cent.
He gives every one of his pies
and cakes away
for free to friends, those who
are sick, or
to hospice volunteers, to those
attending
a funeral, to an elderly woman
or a man who
just can't afford a good meal.
LEO KELLNER: You don't know what
that means
to a person, unless you have
been poor, like
I was years ago.
I would have been so tickled.
And my folks couldn't even give
me a pie or
a cake or something.
So I lived that life.
And that's why I am happy when I
can help
somebody put a smile on their
face.
MADDY MUSICH, 12 Years Old: Hey,
Leo.
DENNIS KELLOGG: Leo is even
building a pie-making
legacy.
He's mentoring 12-year-old Maddy
Musich, teaching
her how to bake, because, as Leo
puts it,
girls today need to know more
than just how
to run a computer.
MADDY MUSICH: He's like my other
grandpa,
kind of.
When I get older, I want to bake
for my kids
and teach them how to do it.
And even if they don't like it,
who doesn't
love food anyway?
LEO KELLNER: I consider her just
more than
a friend, like part of me.
When I go, I want her to take
over where I
left off.
And I think she will.
DENNIS KELLOGG: He can share his
recipes with
Maddy, but she will soon learn
Leo adds something
to his pies and cakes that you
can't buy in
a grocery store.
LEO KELLNER: I make it with
love.
I don't just make it just to be
making it.
I make it with love.
That's my secret ingredient.
DENNIS KELLOGG: For the "PBS
NewsHour," I'm
Dennis Kellogg in Hastings,
Nebraska.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And if I could
get to Nebraska
right now, I would be knocking
on Leo's door.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Finally tonight,
our "NewsHour"
Shares of the day, something
that caught our
eye that we thought may be of
interest to
you too.
In this case, it caught my eye
while I was
at Muhlenberg College in
Allentown, Pennsylvania,
yesterday to give a commencement
address.
I had the chance to hear
Mahsheed Mahjor.
She's a citizen of Afghanistan
and one of
the graduates.
Chosen by her classmates to give
the student
address, Mahsheed spoke of
hardships and inequities
around the world, and role of
citizenship
and the value of her education.
Here's some of what she said.
MAHSHEED MAHJOR, Muhlenberg
College Graduate:
I will never take it for
granted, for it has
changed my life and transformed
my life in
ways that I couldn't have
imagined.
Among others, education taught
me that how
interconnected and how
interdependent our
world is and how beautiful and
meaningful
these relationships could be.
And education motivated me to
stand for what
is right, for human liberation,
for human
dignity.
And I hope it has done the same
for you.
The heartbreaking news from
inside the United
States and around the globe is
evidence to
the fact that the world is a
bloody, awful
place for many, in case you
haven't realized
that yet.
It is so because of the unequal
distribution
of wealth and power.
It is so because the racism and
sexism are
often put before human dignity.
It is so because the life to
some appear to
be worth more than others.
We must remember that our
crucial task is,
is what we will do for others,
for those who
do not have privileges that we
do.
We should continue to be global
citizens,
being concerned for what doesn't
necessarily
impact us, but it does impact a
fellow human
being near and far from us.
We ought to think and work
towards a common
goal, towards human liberation,
towards something
bigger than ourselves, towards a
world that
would reduce and dismantle
institutionalized
classism, racism and sexism and
foster social
justice and equity.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Some words of
wisdom from Mahsheed
Mahjor, graduate of Muhlenberg
College.
This is a young woman going
places.
And that's the "NewsHour" for
tonight.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and we will see you soon.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and we will see you soon.